---
title: ILab CHI Club 2016
layout: post
category: internal
---

> CHI Club is designed as opportunities for CHI authors to get feedback from other members of the lab, and for reviewers to gain experience in reading and providing useful critique for others who are writing.

Your writing sucks.

It sucks because you are not the person who is ultimately going to read your writing, and so you do not know what others' perspectives on your work are -- namely, what the blindspots in your writing are. The purpose of a review process is to help show you: (1) what those blindspots are in your own writing so you can improve the writing to cover them, and (2) how obviously glaring blindspots are to you as a reviewer when you are reading someone else's work. The final "learning objective" of this process is to show you that your writing is never great on the first go, and really great writing happens after iterating on it several times.

# ILab CHI Club 2016

ILab CHI Club 2016 is here to help improve your CHI 2017 submission. As an author, you will also write two reviews of others' work, and then provide feedback to principal authors in a small meeting. Thus, as an author, you will get feedback from others, alongside of getting the chance to help others. If you are not an author, you are also more than welcome to join in the fun by reviewing others' work and helping to improve the lab's output.

We have an aggressive timeline to help you get on track. But, this is not intended to be a "make it or break it" for folks that cannot hit the deadlines -- if you can't make the deadline, you can still contribute reviews (to help in that way); however, you will need to solicit reviews outside of this little "club."

# Timeline

* 8/9 (week of): Tony gives a presentation on "Elements of a First Page"
* 8/16: Submit the **first page (plus stubs)** of your submission to the submission site by noon.
* 8/16 (week of): Lora provides a presentation on "How to provide constructive feedback on a paper submission"
* 8/29: Submit a **complete draft** of your submission by noon. You will receive your review assignments by 5pm.
* 9/1 (evening): Submit both of **your reviews** before the morning of 9/2. This way your authors can review the reviews.
* 9/2: Join us for lunch from 11-2. You will use this time to meet with your authors/reviewers to discuss the feedback. This feedback session will be structured around how to provide feedback and how to move forward.

# Submission Site

This is a real submission site that is used for many conferences. You will need to create an account on the site if you do not have one, and register to author and review submissions.

* [Submission site](https://easychair.org/conferences/?conf=ilabchiclub2016)

# Rules

The first rule of CHI Club is: you do not talk about CHI Club. The second rule of CHI Club is: you do not talk about CHI Club. ([Kidding!](http://www.diggingforfire.net/fightclub/))

Okay, seriously, here are the rules:

1. You need to complete at least **2** reviews for every paper you submit as a first author. If your co-authors can contribute additional reviews, or you want to pass one of those reviews off to a co-author, excellent. But, you should do at least one personally.
2. You adhere to the timeline -- particularly for submitting your full draft, and your reviews.
3. You commit as a reviewer to reading drafts of others' submissions, and working with (and meeting with) the author to improve the work.
4. As an author, your responsibility is to arrange the meeting with your reviewer(s) at the pizza party (or later) to go over the feedback to improve your work.

# FAQ

* **I am not a first author. Can I still review submissions?**

Absolutely! Just register onto the submission site, and you will be provided with two reviews (or more, if you request) to complete.

* **I do not know how to provide feedback. What do I do?**

Lora will develop a presentation that helps talk you through this issue. Additionally, we will provide a rubric that you can work with you develop your reviewer. Remember that ultimately, you want to provide the author with feedback to help improve their work -- the purpose here is not to write an excellent prose review.

* **I am a post doc.**

That's not a question, but great. You'll be assigned 4-6 reviews. Thanks for your service.

* **Do I have to do this?**

Absolutely not. It is voluntary. That is, unless you're Tony's student, in which case, it is mandatory.


