---
title: ILab CHI Club 2018
layout: post
category: internal
---

> CHI Club is designed as opportunities for CHI authors to get feedback from other members of the lab, and for reviewers to gain experience in reading and providing useful critique for others who are writing.

Your writing sucks.

It sucks because you are not the person who is ultimately going to read your writing, and so you do not know what others' perspectives on your work are -- namely, what the blindspots in your writing are. The purpose of a review process is to help show you: (1) what those blindspots are in your own writing so you can improve the writing to cover them, and (2) how obviously glaring blindspots are to you as a reviewer when you are reading someone else's work. The final "learning objective" of this process is to show you that your writing is never great on the first go, and really great writing happens after iterating on it several times.

# ILab CHI Club 2018

ILab CHI Club 2018 is here to help improve your CHI 2019 submission. As an author, you will also write two reviews of others' work, and then provide feedback to principal authors in a small meeting. Thus, as an author, you will get feedback from others, alongside of getting the chance to help others. If you are not an author, you are also more than welcome to join in the fun by reviewing others' work and helping to improve the lab's output.

We have an aggressive timeline to help you get on track. But, this is not intended to be a "make it or break it" for folks that cannot hit the deadlines -- if you can't make the deadline, you can still contribute reviews (to help in that way); however, you will need to solicit reviews outside of this little "club."

# Timeline

## Phase 1
* 9/5 Wed (noon): Authors: Submit **only the first page** of your submission to your reviewers (cc your co-authors)
* 9/6 Thu (3pm): Tony's talk: The First Page
	* Bring your laptops. We will make a new submission to PCS for your submission.
* 9/7 Fri (noon): Reviewers: Draft a paragraph about what you expect to see in the full paper based on what you have seen in the introduction. Send this to all the co-authors on the submission. If you can, meet with the first author to discuss your suggestions.
	* Crucially: make note of what the problem is, the approach, the evaluation, and what the contribution is supposed to be. Tell the authors what factors you'd expect to see in the submission for it to be successful.
	* Authors: consider the reviewers' feedback, and consider particularly how your introduction sets up certain kinds of expectations (one way or another). If it seems like it's not matching up with how the rest of the submission will go, this should tell you something. Revise the introduction! (or the rest of your submission)

## Phase 2
* 9/10 Mon (3pm): Authors: Submit a **complete draft** of your submission to your reviewers. (cc your co-authors)
* 9/10 Mon (4pm): Tony's talk: Providing a review and feedback
* 9/13 Thu (5pm): Reviewers: send a review back to the authors (cc'ing all authors). Ideally, meet with at least the lead author at this time, too.

<!--
# Submission Site

This is a real submission site that is used for many conferences. You will need to create an account on the site if you do not have one, and register to author and review submissions.

* [Submission site](https://easychair.org/conferences/?conf=ilabchiclub2016)
-->

# Rules

The first rule of CHI Club is: you do not talk about CHI Club. The second rule of CHI Club is: you do not talk about CHI Club. ([Kidding!](http://www.diggingforfire.net/fightclub/))

Okay, seriously, here are the rules:

1. You need to complete at least **2** reviews for every paper you submit as a first author. If your co-authors can contribute additional reviews, or you want to pass one of those reviews off to a co-author, excellent. But, you should do at least one personally.
2. You adhere to the timeline -- particularly for submitting your full draft, and your reviews.
3. You commit as a reviewer to reading drafts of others' submissions, and working with (and meeting with) the author to improve the work.
4. As an author, your responsibility is to arrange the meeting with your reviewer(s)  to go over the feedback to improve your work.

# FAQ

* **I am not a first author. Can I still review submissions?**

Absolutely! Just let Tony know.

* **I do not know how to provide feedback. What do I do?**

Tony will develop a presentation that helps talk you through this issue. Additionally, we will provide a rubric that you can work with you develop your reviewer. Remember that ultimately, you want to provide the author with feedback to help improve their work -- the purpose here is not to write an excellent prose review.

<!--
* **I am a post doc.**

That's not a question, but great. You'll be assigned 4-6 reviews. Thanks for your service.
-->

* **Do I have to do this?**

Absolutely not. It is voluntary. That is, unless you're Tony's student, in which case, it is mandatory.


